In this and the next videos you will learn about a technique called sparse probing.
It's actually just an application of logistic regression with a particular type of regularization that
pushes a lot of the regression coefficients to be zero.
I will start this video by going through some of the math of L1 regularization.
The key regularization parameter and the difference between logistic regression for sparse probing versus
logistic regression to identify category tuning in individual neurons.
And that is how we used regression a few sections ago.
And then I'll switch to code and show you how to implement and evaluate sparse logistic regression.
So this is a screenshot from a video earlier in the course where you learned about classification using
logistic Regression.
You don't necessarily need to rewatch that video, but I'm showing it here in hopes that it will reactivate
some happy memories of learning about logistic regression.
The most important equation from that video was this one here, that the regression is designed to predict
the probability that a given token belongs to one of two categories.
So this was the general form of a logistic regression.
In that classification application there were only two beta values beta zero which is the intercept,
and beta one which was the coefficient for the token activation.
Now we are going to extend this analysis and have multiple betas corresponding to k neurons.
So in this slide I will describe a few other differences between using logistic regression for classification
versus for sparse probing.
Let's start with the overall goal.
With a logistic classifier, the goal is to determine whether a given neuron or dimension, or just
some variable more generally, is tuned to a particular category, which means that its activation is
reliably greater for, I don't know, like tokens related to cars versus tokens related to trucks.
So that's for one variable, like one neuron with sparse probing.
We want to see if we can identify a group or a cluster or circuit.
Here I use the word ensemble of neurons that together.
So they're a collective patterns of activations predict a particular category label.
So here this is not about one neuron individually.
It's about a group of neurons that are together statistically able to predict a category in terms of
the mechanism and the math.
Actually, both of these approaches are based on logistic regression.
So the statistics mechanism is actually the same.
It's just that with a classifier the logistic regression only sees one neuron at a time.
Whereas with the sparse probe the regression incorporates activations from lots of neurons at the same
time.
And finally we have regularization.
And actually it's not really the case that you're not allowed to have any regularization on a logistic
classifier.
Sometimes people add some like soft regularization, but in general, logistic classifiers don't need
as strong regularization compared with sparse probing, where we add a stronger amount of L1 regularization.
And this forces sparsity.
So that means that a lot of the coefficients will be set to zero, and a relatively small number of
coefficients are allowed to be non-zero.
So what is this regularization?
How does it work and how do we find the beta coefficients?
That is the answer I'm going to discuss in this slide.
So here again we see the equation of the logistic regression.
The way it works for a sparse probe is that for k neurons let's say 3000 MLP expansion neurons you would
have k equals 3000.
I think it's technically 3072.
So that means that you get a beta coefficient for every individual neuron.
And the idea is to figure out how to define a linear weighted combination of the activations from all
the neurons, such that their weighted combination best predicts whether a token is from category one
or category two or whatever, two different categories.
And how do we actually get these beta coefficients?
That comes from defining a loss function that looks like this.
I hope you recognize this as binary cross entropy.
Why is the category which is either 0 or 1 so dummy coded?
Or you could call it one hot encoded.
And p is the probability.
So that's this term over here.
And I corresponds to a given presentation of a token.
And n is the total number of tokens in the analysis in the training set.
So this is the general loss function for a logistic regression when you want to regularize the regression.
You have another loss function which looks something like this.
So it's R here.
That is for the regularizer loss function.
And here you sum over all of the absolute values of the beta coefficients.
The impact of this regularizer term is that a lot of the coefficients will go to zero, and a relatively
small number of them will remain non-zero.
So this is called L1.
And actually if you square these beta coefficients up here instead of taking the absolute value, that
would be an L2 regularizer.
I have talked earlier in the course about the difference between L1 and L2.
We're not using L2 regularization here in this video.
I just wanted to mention the similarity between L1 and L2.
Anyway, so now the idea is that we want to find the set of betas that minimizes the loss function and
also the regularizer loss function.
And then we have this term lambda here which is just a scalar, so it's just a number.
And the idea is that when lambda is larger, then the model puts more weight on imposing sparsity.
And of course when lambda is zero then you just have the normal logistic regression with no regularization.
By the way, when you add an L1 regularizer that's also called a lasso regression with an L2 regularizer,
that's called ridge regression.
And if you have both L1 and L2 then that's called elasticnet.
Uh, you don't need to know those terms for this course.
I just mentioned it here, FYI.
Anyway, uh, okay, but I haven't actually explained how we really find these beta coefficients.
All I've done is tell you what the loss function is.
It turns out that gradient descent is a great way to find the betas that optimize this equation.
Over here for logistic regression, there is a slight variant of gradient descent compared to what you're
familiar with for deep learning, and that is called stochastic average gradient or Saga.
You will see in the code that I use this abbreviation as a parameter.
Also something slightly confusing and like super.
Really a lot annoying about scikit learn is that it doesn't allow you to specify the lambda parameter
directly.
Instead, it takes a different parameter called C, which is just one over lambda.
So if you want to have a smaller lambda, which would mean less regularization, then you would use
a larger value of c.
So yeah that's what I write over here.
So higher lambda, which also means a smaller value of c leads to more coefficients being equal to zero.
Okay.
So this is all very like abstract theoretical math.
Let me now tell you what we're going to do in the code demo.
I will use GPT two small for this demo and hook the MLP expansion neurons from one layer.
These will actually be the post non-linearity activations.
And as you know, sometimes in this course I use the pre activations.
It's a subtle distinction between the two and which one to use for different analyses.
But basically the pre activations tell you about the representation of the data in the high dimensional
space where the model, the MLP layer is trying to learn how to transform the input data.
So the token embeddings vectors into a space that is more amenable to linear separation, whereas the
post non-linear activations correspond to the filtered information that gets passed along to the next
layer, which of course in this case corresponds to the MLP adjustments to the embeddings vectors in
the residual stream.
Anyway, I'm going to import some data from the fine web dataset.
You will remember that we used this dataset earlier in the course in pre-training and fine tuning the
GPT models.
So for this code demo, the goal will be to see if we can find a circuit, an ensemble of MLP neurons
based on a sparse logistic probe that is tuned to definite versus indefinite articles.
In particular, I will focus on the words the and an.
This is used for definite articles like when we refer to a specific.
I don't know, chair or like a specific chocolate bar that someone was saving for themselves, but I
accidentally ate.
Where has the article N is used generally to refer to any given chocolate bar, not the one that I actually
stole.
Anyway, we do have to be a little mindful when picking out these tokens from the text, because the
tokens for th and an can also be the start of a word.
So a subword at the beginning or in the middle of another word instead of actual words themselves.
Now I will let you ponder what you might need to do in the code to make sure that you are getting these
two tokens as complete words, and not as just the first token of a multi token word.
Of course, I'll show my solution to that little problem in the code.
Anyway, here you see a few examples of sequences that contain the word the and an.
So here you see the the the.
It's always at the end I put it at the end.
And here is n and n n and so on.
And then I'm going to have a brief tangent to talk a little bit more about spaces before tokens.
This is an issue that has come up often in this course, and it's an easy source of confusion when working
with models and tokenizers.
So therefore I will introduce you to an optional input in the tokenizer which is called add prefix space.
I will show you what this does and what implications it has.
But the take home is quite simple.
It simply adds a space before the text that you input.
Anyway, I'm going to extract 100 of each of these tokens.
And when I push that through the model to get the MLP activations, that will give me activations matrices
of size 100 by 3072, corresponding to the 100 tokens 100 sequences where with the target token extracted
and 3072 neurons in the MLP expansion layer.
Now, before running the analysis, I'm going to split this dataset into a train and test set.
There's going to be 140 samples used for training and 60 samples used for testing.
And what you see here are the distributions of all the activation values for the two target words.
Now this is all the data including the train and the test set.
It's definitely not Gaussian distributed because these are the post Gelu activations.
The pre non-linear activations do tend to look roughly Gaussian, but as you know, the JLo squeezes
down the negative values.
Anyway, the point here is that at this global population level, there doesn't appear to be any really
major differences in activations for the two articles for the and N.
Maybe there's some shift towards smaller activation values for N, but I don't think that's a real reliable
difference.
Anyway, this is pooling over all of the data.
Next what I will do is train a logistic classifier on these data.
And we will see that the performance is literally perfect.
So there is some combination of the 3000 neurons that can perfectly predict whether each target token
is the or n.
Now, that may initially seem impressive, but keep in mind that we are using 3000 features to predict
160 observations.
So it is true that the results that I'm showing here actually come from the test set and not the training
set.
But still, the sample size is just really small.
Anyway, that's fine for our purposes here, because the goal of this demo is to show you how to set
up the code and visualizations for this kind of analysis, and not to do like a full research project
with a sufficient sample size where you would probably want thousands or tens of thousands of tokens.
Anyway, here you can see some of the results.
So based on the value of lambda that I used, we got a density of around 0.4.
So that means that only 13 out of the 3000 neurons actually had a non-zero coefficient.
All the other coefficients were exactly zero.
And basically what this means is that the logistic regression only needed 13 neurons in order to predict
whether a given token is the word, the or the word n.
By the way, density is the opposite of sparsity.
So density of 0.4% means that only 0.4% of the coefficients are non-zero.
And we could equivalently say that the sparsity is 99.6%, which would mean that 99.6% of the coefficients
are equal to zero.
And how about the sign of these coefficients?
What do you think the sign of the coefficients means?
I guess that you guess that the sign corresponds to whether more activations means the, or whether
more activation means that the token was n.
That is a good intuition, and in theory that is the way it should work.
However, with data sets this large, especially with relatively small sample sizes, that's not necessarily
what these results mean.
What the sign of the coefficients indicates.
Gates.
There's something else pernicious going on here, which is called statistical suppression.
I'm going to talk about that term and that phenomenon more in the next video.
But anyway, here you see scatter plots with all 13 of the neurons that had non-zero coefficients and
their activations for each of the 100 of the the tokens and the 100 and tokens.
Now, it's not surprising that there aren't really negative activations here, and a lot of these activations
are just kind of like crunched up.
They're all like bundled up at some value just below zero.
That is the impact of the jlu non-linearity.
Okay.
The last analysis that I will show in this demo is the relationship between sparsity and the lambda
parameter.
Or actually this is showing density here.
But you could just show So sparsity as 100 minus these numbers over here.
So basically all I did was rerun the same logistic regression model with the same data except for the
parameter c.
Now these two plots show exactly the same results from exactly the same models.
But here on the right I'm plotting the value of c on the x axis.
And here on the left, I'm plotting the value of lambda which is one divided by c.
These results are interesting, but really not that surprising when lambda is small, which also means
when c is large, then you have more non-zero coefficients, and when lambda is large, or when c is
small, then you have very few neurons with non-zero coefficients.
And why is this a sensible result?
Because when lambda is closer to zero than the L1 regularizer doesn't really contribute to the overall
loss function.
Whereas when lambda gets bigger, then the optimization gets more weighted by the L1 term.
Anyway, let's switch to Python and have a look.
So here we are with the typical libraries.
And here is some stuff from scikit learn.
So logistic regression I'm using this function.
Train test split to split the data into a train set and a test set.
And this function also to give us the classification performance, which I can already tell you is going
to be extremely good.
Here I'm importing GPT two.
And of course the tokenizer as well.
And here's where I'm hooking all of the neurons.
So you can see I'm looking for MLP.
And then I get this act layer in here.
And this is the post Gelu activations.
So let me show you what part of the model that corresponds to.
So here we are in layer H, the hidden layer, the transformer blocks we are looking at here, the MLP.
That's this part over here.
And now typically I would use the FC the fully connected.
That's the expansion layer.
Or if we are specifically looking for the adjustments to the embeddings vector, that would be the output
of C proj.
And what I am going to look at here is the output of act, and that this is not in the order in which
the operations are applied.
But basically this act here is what goes after the fully connected layer and before the projection.
Okay.
So this will be the jlu activation of the expansion layer.
So run that.
And yeah it's kind of arbitrary that I'm just hooking into one layer here.
Of course you can try hooking into different layers.
Okay, so here is the data.
I'm importing the fine web data set, not the full data set.
Of course it's ginormous.
I'm only going to extract the first 500 documents, and I append all of the tokens onto each other.
Here I'm looking for the target tokens, the and n.
And notice here I'm explicitly putting in spaces in front of the target words that I'm looking for.
I will get back to that in a moment.
So in this text, there are 11,000 appearances of the token and 800 appearances of the token N space
an and from all of these, I am going to sample just 100 for each of the target tokens.
These tokens will or these sequences will be 17 tokens long.
And let's see.
So here so here's where I do it okay.
So I'm looping over all of the the tokens.
So all 11,000 of the tokens that match the word uh the character sequence space.
And now here I have a little bit of code to check whether the following token is starts with a space.
And the reason why I'm looking for this is that if we have a word like for example, uh, theology,
let's say this is the token, then it might actually start with space.
The but this is not what we're looking for.
So if space is not an entire word, it's not the word the but it is part of a sub word.
So it's a sub word that's part of a multi token word.
Then this second this subsequent token here is not going to start with a space.
It will start with anything other than a space.
So that's the idea here.
If the next token begins with a space, then we are looking at the and then something else.
Okay.
So that's the idea.
And then we also do not want to run through this entire loop only until we have enough samples and then.
Yeah.
So if these two conditions are true then we store in this row of the batch.
We store the tokens from minus context free to plus context post.
Okay.
And then I repeat exactly the same for n again I want the next token to begin with a space.
And then here you see a few examples.
Yeah.
This is not super interesting.
Just to see what some of these sequences actually look like.
Down here is the little tangent just to introduce you to this optional input add prefix space.
I believe this is actually the only time in this entire course that I ever actually use this optional
input.
I think it is better.
I think it's clear to, uh, to have this space explicitly written in here, because then you really
know that there is this space here.
Uh, whereas, yeah, if you have no space in the target word here, but then you add a space like this,
I just find that to be a little bit less intuitive.
And what I'm showing here is that, uh, yeah, you will get different tokens.
So this token is the same as this token, even though this, uh, includes a preceding space, and this
does not include a preceding preceding space.
Because here I said add prefix space equals false, which is the default value.
And here add prefix space equals true.
Again, I find this all to be a little confusing, and therefore my preference is to set add prefix
space to be false, which is the default value and explicitly include this space beforehand.
Okay, so that's just FYI.
Here I'm pushing all the tokens through the model.
These are the values of this activations.
Dictionary will get overwritten here when I push this batch through the model.
So therefore I need to extract this or save it as a separate variable.
And also in this case we are not interested in all of the tokens.
We only want the activations for the target tokens, which is this position here.
So we get all the sequences, the target token, so the token corresponding to the word the and then
all of the MLP expansion neurons post Jlu.
And that's what you see here.
Okay.
And here I'm just showing the histogram of these all the activations over all the neurons.
Honestly I don't think this is super interesting to look at, but it does confirm that we really are
grabbing the post Gelu activations because you do not see a lot of uh, like a tail here going into
the negative activations.
Instead you just see this bunching up this really large, uh, number of activations that have values
just below zero because, yeah, that's just the nature of the, uh, suppression, the weighting of
the Gelu function.
Okay, here I'm combining all of the activations into one matrix called all data and then creating labels.
So it's 100 zeros and 100 ones.
Remember that when you have a list like this.
Uh, so that's just a one element list.
And then if you multiply it by let's say two, then it will just repeat this twice.
And if I multiply it by 20 then I get 20 values of four.
So here I get sample size.
This is a parameter that I set to be 100 100 zeros and 100 ones.
And then I'm using the plus to concatenate two lists.
And then here I'm converting them into a numpy array that will be easier for indexing and so on later.
Okay.
And then here I'm splitting the data into a train set and train labels and a test set.
And here you see the size is 140 for the training set and 160 sorry just 60 for the test set.
So now the idea is that I'm going to train the logistic regression only on these data, the training
set without showing the model any of these data.
And then I will evaluate the performance of the model on these data and not on the training set.
Okay.
And so here's what it looks like.
So most of this code you have seen before the logistic regression function from scikit learn.
You have seen that and then.
Yeah.
Here.
Uh, dot fit you've seen before dot predict.
You have seen before what is new here.
Uh, compared to what I showed earlier in the course for uh, classification is adding the penalty L1.
And here you see the solver which I mentioned in the slides a few moments ago.
Saga.
This is stochastic average gradient descent.
And, uh, yeah.
Then I set the c parameter to be ten, which means that lambda is one divided by 10 or 0.1 okay.
Now the max iterations, the number of iterations is by default 100 for some types of problems.
If you have a relatively clean data set or not, so many variables, that number is fine.
I thought it would be good to add another zero here to increase the number of iterations by an order
of magnitude.
And what does this correspond to?
This is literally just the number of training epochs in gradient descent that this model is implementing.
Okay.
So yeah, now I'm fitting the data to the training set or fitting the model to the training data.
And then I'm predicting the test data.
And then yeah I call this function Classificationreport.
And that's going to print out the accuracy the F1 score and so on.
This is honestly not so interesting to look at for this problem because it's all exactly perfect.
So we get perfect accuracy.
On the one hand that is kind of impressive.
It does mean that there is some meaningful patterns that the model was able to identify in the MLP,
uh, activations that really did separate the token activations for the versus for N, but on the other
hand, it's a huge model and a really small sample size, so you should not overinterpret this pattern
of findings.
Okay.
This is just a reminder.
I've mentioned this in the slides as well.
The term sparsity refers to the number of zero coefficients.
So the coefficients the beta coefficients that equal zero and the density is the number of non-zero
coefficients.
And of course that's scaled by the total number of coefficients.
And actually this what I'm showing here would be proportion.
It's also common to multiply it by 100 to get a percent.
Okay.
So yeah that's what I'm doing here.
I'm just extracting the coefficients from the result and finding where are the coefficients equal to
zero and where are they not equal to zero.
Okay.
And then we can just plot those data and plot the coefficients.
So there are red x's where we had exactly zero and green circles where we have non-zero coefficients.
Now the exact number here in the slides I showed a screenshot of 13, which was like 0.4%.
There's some stochasticity, there's some randomness in the model fitting and also in the train test
split here.
So each time you rerun this code you are going to get slightly different results.
But it's always going to be somewhere around here.
Uh, of course that number can change remarkably depending on what you set this value to.
Uh, I will explore that in a moment.
Uh, but of course you can play around with this yourself as well.
Okay.
And then here we see the histogram of the non-zero coefficients.
All right.
So that's that.
And here I'm just plotting the data.
So I'm looping through all of the non-zero coefficients and grabbing their data where labels equals
zero.
That was the token the where labels equals one.
That is the token n.
And yeah.
Then you see here's the histogram the activations for the and the activations for n.
Again this does not match exactly what I showed in the slides a moment ago because of just random random
numbers that are generated when initializing the model and the data selection.
Okay, here this code is interesting to look at the results, but not so interesting in terms of any
novelty of the code.
This is exactly the same code that I have above.
All I'm doing is changing the value of C.
So here I call this vector C's for like you know C's like this.
So I'm changing the value of C between 1 and 100.
And then just measuring how many coefficients are not equal to zero.
So how many coefficients the model actually needed in order to get the best prediction that it could?
Now there's a lot of other information you could extract.
For example, the prediction is that is the prediction always 100% for all these values of C.
That is something you could incorporate into this code.
It's not something I have done here.
I just want to show you the basics of what it looks like for what the density looks like for different
values of C, or equivalently lambda.
So that took around three minutes to run through 17 different values of the parameter c.
Now you do see this warning message.
Here it says that maxiter was reached which means the coefficients did not converge.
That is not necessarily a bad thing.
That is something that deserves a little bit of inspection.
You could look at the coefficients and so on, but it's not necessarily a bad thing.
Just like when you are training a deep learning model, you don't necessarily know when is an appropriate
time to stop training the model.
So should you train for 500 epochs, 1000 epochs, 2000 epochs, and so on?
You don't necessarily know, and it is not necessarily the case that stopping a little bit earlier is
necessarily detrimental to model performance.
Okay.
And then yeah, the final thing I was going to show is this plot here, which you saw in the slides.
Basically the point is that this value of density, this is not an absolute value that comes from the
analysis necessarily.
So it's not that each time you rerun the analysis you will necessarily get the same value of density.
Instead, the density or equivalently the sparsity is a function of the regularization parameter.
So you know you can actually get a desired level of sparsity.
Not entirely, but you can shift it around.
You can shift this result around depending on how you set the value of lambda, or for scikit learn,
the value of c.
I hope you found this video to be interesting and useful.
Sparse probing is a super interesting analysis, but the results can be weird and difficult to interpret
in very large data sets, especially when there are correlations across the different variables.
I'm going to get into those issues in more detail in the next video, but the point is that the models
are trying to predict labels, not individual neurons.
So it doesn't really matter what individual neurons get, what coefficients.
What matters is whether the entire data set can be used to predict a label.
More on that in the next video.